Let's get into what I consider
to be a very exciting topic.
And I know that a lot of developers
don't get excited about tests, but
I feel like they're really important.
So you notice that already we did
a little bit of refactoring as we went.
The first bit of refactoring
that we did was, okay,
let's group all these APIs together,
put them under route groups.
So we demonstrated route groups and
then I tested them, right,
I fired up the application and
I started hitting the postman and
I started hitting the endpoints to
make sure that they still worked.
But that feedback loop kinda sucks,
especially when you get into API projects
where they get dozens and dozens and
sometimes hundreds of APIs.
So I think tests are the best tool
that we have in our tool belt,
to kind of mitigate that right?
To provide a really
tight feedback loop and
also protect our code
bases from bad refactors.
So we're gonna talk about tests.
The first thing we gotta
do is have a test project.
So all tests have what's
called a test project.
So we're gonna go here and
we're going to go to Solution Explorer,
we're gonna right click and
we're gonna hit, here, right here.
We're gonna hit plus, and you're gonna see
that we can create a new .NET project.
We can also right click and
see new project either is works.
So I'm gonna say that.
So this is our solution file.
This is our SLN file.
This one is our project file,
we're gonna go to our solution.
We're gonna scroll all the way
down to X unit test project.
So we're going to use X unit for this.
There is an MS test, there is an NUnit,
but even Microsoft mostly uses X unit, so
it's the one that I recommend.
But to be honest with you,
if you're writing tests,
that's really all I care about.
So we're gonna call it
TheEmployeeAPI.Tests,
hit, enter, put in the default directory.
That's just fine, and
then create the project.
Yep, go, let's do it.
You can also choose to do this through
the command line interface, but
I'm unapologetically a UI guys.
I'm going to do it through the UI and
the first thing that you're going
to see is that we have
a file that looks like this.
It's a unit test, and it's a very,
very, very tiny blueprint for
a unit test for this project.
Let's break down what we're seeing here.
We see a pretty boring class
with a pretty boring method, but
it has this attribute at the top of it.
It's Fact, and we're basically
establishing this is ground truth.
And this is the thing that X unit will
use to say, okay, this is a test.
This is basically our way
of denoting this as a test.
We go to test here and we do, let's do
open our terminal with Ctrl+Shift+tilde,
make sure we're in the right directory.
I'm going to call dotnet build
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And
you should see the tests come up
here in this little beaker icon.
You'll see that once we built,
it found our test and
we can run it even inside of the UI.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: I
also do dotnet test a lot.
You'll see that me do that several times
and you can see that our test passed.
Well, it's 'cause it's not
really doing anything.
It's not throwing an exception.
It's not saying, hey, this test failed,
which is what we expect, which is good.
Next thing we need to do is add
a reference to our project,
our main API from this test project.
So, we're gonna go to add project, we're
gonna right click on the project file for
the test project.
We're gonna click Add Project Reference
and it's gonna say,
what do you wanna add a reference to?
And we're gonna say the employee API.
And now that's gonna give us
access to all the goodies here so
that we can actually write tests for
this API.
Next thing we're going to do is we're
gonna install a NuGet package to this test
project.
And this is going to be probably my
favorite testing NuGet package for
ASP.NET Core.
There are essentially two major
types of tests, unit tests,
which can test individual behaviors,
and then integration tests,
which do their best in a perfect
world to execute tests for
as real as possible
throughout an entire system.
This testing package is really cool
because it's gonna allow us to hit
our APIs.
It's gonna allow us to test our APIs
exactly as our user is gonna use them.
So this actually, under the hood will spin
up a separate web server that the tests
will execute against, which is really
cool, and it happens very fast.
So, we're gonna go here, we're gonna say,
we're gonna open up our
command thing here, and
we're gonna say a little bracket
to give it a little command.
I'd hit command+P for that, by the way.
And we're gonna say focus on
NuGet view cause I recently used it.
And I'm gonna go ahead and
paste the name of this package in here and
you're gonna see that it's the first thing
that comes up right here at the top,
which is what we'd hoped for,
and then we're gonna go ahead and
install that to our test project.
Boom,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: It's great,
perfect.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So now,
we have almost all the pieces that
we need to run this application.
But we do need to make a slight change to
our employee API project because we're
using top level statements and
we don't have a defined program file.
We could, in fact, just go ahead and
convert to a program main style program,
which we can do here.
I don't do that for this course but
if you're using top level statements,
you just have to put in a program
declaration here at the bottom.
So we're just gonna go ahead and
put a public partial class program.
And that's gonna mark our
program class as public.
So that way it can be
accessed do the test project.
Now we can add our test class.
I'm just going to copy paste this in.
Boom, go to our test.
Boom, take out this
whole class definition.
I'm gonna see some squiggly lines.
It's because we need
to import some things.
I don't do anything that I don't.
I just let the tooling do the work for me.
So you can click on that and hit this
little hourglass or the little light bulb.
And then you could say, using
Microsoft.AspNet.Core.Mvc.Testing, pretty easy so far.
So a couple of things about this.
I class fixture is basically
an instruction to X unit to say, hey,
I need you to create a copy of this.
And then I need you to if it's disposable,
which in this case,
web application factory of program
is then destroy it at the end.
So it's just basically a way for
us to tell X unit, hey,
you need to construct this thing.
And then web application factory
itself is the testing abstraction
provided by Microsoft's Testing
framework to basically say,
hey, I wanna be able to run and
start a copy of this program.
So it's very useful.
So let's write our first test.
So we're gonna call it a Fact.
We're gonna say public async, because,
as we covered in the previous course,
we make HTTP requests with a HTTP client,
and we do it in an asynchronous way.
So we're going to say public async task,
get all employees, returns OK result.
Do that.
And then we're going to
create a copy of our client.
So we're going to say var client.
I'll be more explicit just for
illustrative purposes.
So HTTP client.
Client=_factory, and you'll see that we
have a bunch of stuff on this factory.
We have a reference to the server,
which we won't have to use too often.
We have a reference to the services so
we can actually get
services out of this thing.
We can access our dependency
injection pipeline here.
And we have this method here
CreateClient which is exactly what we want.
And you can see that it is indeed
an instance of HTTP client.
So now we have something that can
interact with the server right
in the exact same way that our clients for
this published API would access what
same way we access it through postman.
So we're going to say var
response =await client.GetAsync.
We need to provide it a route.
So we'll say slash employees and
then we want to say response
dot ensure success status code.
This will basically throw an exception
if the status code is anything
outside of a 200 to 299, you could
also use some of the of the assert
class that's provided by X unit
Assert.Fail, for instance or
Assert.True, you can say
response.IsSuccessStatusCode.
Because that's a, it will tell you
if it's a 200 status code or not.
Either is fine.
I try not to use ensure success status
code in other code outside of tests,
simply because I like to handle my
HTTP client responses explicitly.
Now we're gonna actually run our test.
So I'm gonna go Control+Shift+tilde,
and I'm gonna say dotnet test.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And you're gonna
see that it actually did pass the test,
which is exactly what we wanted to see.
And just to show you,
this is what it's executing.
We can actually go to our test thing here
and we can actually debug our tests, which
is occasionally important when you wanna
see exactly the behavior that's going on,
and you can see that it executed
it against a real endpoint,
and the status code was indeed
200 which is what we want.
It's perfect.
It's exactly what we wanted.
So that's great.
That's our first test.
So now what do we get from that?
Well, we get a way to test this thing
in a repeatable, really fast way,
without having to go and
do it ourselves every single time.
Gives us some protection
as we're refactoring.
We gonna do a lot of refactoring.
All right, so we've written a test for our
first endpoint, which is really exciting.
So now, let's scroll down and
let's get the fact classes for
the rest of our endpoints
are the fact methods, I should say,
go to our test class and paste them in,
and then we'll talk about them.
First things first,
you're going to see some squiggly lines.
The import statements are right here.
We just need a couple
of additional things,
mainly ones around using methods that
are of available on HTTP client,
the read from JSON method, actually.
So let's talk about this.
So first things first,
I think we overrode our other test.
Let's put that back.
So let's take a look
at the other behaviors
that we're actually testing here.
So you can see that we
are Testing our Get Async, and
we should expect a success status code,
because in our API definition here,
we've started our list of
employees with an ID of one.
So because we have set it up that way,
we set our part as they say,
the system under test and the system
under test comes with two ID employees
with that ID by default, you can see that
we indeed get a success status code back.
Here's a slightly different one for
our post request.
So I'm going to put this on a next line so
that it can kind of all be together, and
you're gonna see that our
client Is created here, but
now we're doing a post request and
we're actually saying to HTTP client,
post this as JSON, this is actually an
extension method to say take this body of
this thing that I've put, convert it to
JSON for me, serialize it to JSON for
me, and
then send it out to the post endpoint.
And you can see that success status
code back, and then down here,
we have our CreateEmployee, but
we're just passing it in a blank object.
And we don't want, as we mentioned,
as we demonstrated earlier,
if we don't have a first and
last name, it's gonna complain at us.
So we do expect that the bad request
status code will be sent back.
And you can see,
we do that with Assert.Equal to say,
we expect the status code on
this response to be bad request.
And you can see, if I build my solution,
actually, I'm just gonna call dotnet test.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: You're gonna
see that all four of our tests pass,
because that's the behavior.